---
layout: default
title: data_flow
nav_order: 5
---

Last update: 20240919

Data flow {#data_flow_sec}
=========

The data generation and analysis process involves several stages,
beginning with sample collection and culminating in the presentation of
final results. This process is designed to integrate with existing
clinical databases using newly developed OMICs concepts based on the
SPHN ontology. The process is summarised in **figure
[1](#fig:precision_med_dataflow){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:precision_med_dataflow"}.**

We have worked with SPHN and
[TheHyve](https://www.thehyve.nl/articles/bridging-clinical-and-genomics-knowledge)
to develop new concepts which cover the generation of sequencing data
and analysis, recently published in @van2023bridging as illustrated in
**figure [3](#fig:concept){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:concept"}**. We have also developed the concepts which
cover the final outputs of downstream analysis results for omic results.
This work enhances the integration of omics data into the SPHN Semantic
Interoperability Framework, which primarily handles clinical routine
data.

Our new genomics extension enriches the framework to include
comprehensive descriptions of genomics experiments, encompassing both
clinical and research applications. It outlines the entire omics process
flow, detailing steps from sample processing to data analysis, including
specifics like library preparation and sequencing analysis. The
extension also integrates additional omics metadata, such as details on
sequencing instruments and quality control metrics. By aligning with
established semantic models and leveraging common biomedical
vocabularies (e.g., EDAM, OBI, and FAIR genomes), it promotes semantic
interoperability and aims to FAIRify data for shared use within the
Swiss network, enhancing data reuse in a unified knowledge graph.

![precision medicine unit data flow from sample collection to final
result presentation. **Sample collection**: Sample collection occurs in
. SMOC typically processes most physical samples of DNA, RNA, serum, or
other tissues. Multi-omic data is generated and transfered to BioMedIT.
**Analysis on BioMedIT**: Bioinformatic analysis pipelines process the
data and produce a main analysis output which is stored long-term. Key
actionable results from this large dataset are prepared according to
SPHN ontology, using concepts such as "sequencing assay" and "omic
result". **Transfer results to** : Two datasets are prepared before
transfer to the network. (1) The data for which we have SPHN concepts
and is suitable for a clinical data warehouse is prepared in TSV, SQL,
RDF, or other format. (2) Supplemental reports with extensive metadata,
visualisations, and contextual information in formats such as TSV, PDF,
HTML. Both datasets are transfered to the network for database
integration and file storage,
respectively.](precision_med_dataflow){#fig:precision_med_dataflow
width="60%"}

![Figure extract and text quoted from @van2023bridging: (A) Basic
excerpt of the schema for the (gen)omics process flow. (B) Diagram
visualising an instance of a sequencing assay that analyses one sample
and produces one FASTQ file. "Sequencing Assay" concept, together with
its "Instrument", "Library Preparation", "Standard Operating Procedure",
and "Quality Control Metric" concepts from which it is
composed.](concept_f1 "fig:"){#fig:concept width="80%"} ![Figure extract
and text quoted from @van2023bridging: (A) Basic excerpt of the schema
for the (gen)omics process flow. (B) Diagram visualising an instance of
a sequencing assay that analyses one sample and produces one FASTQ file.
"Sequencing Assay" concept, together with its "Instrument", "Library
Preparation", "Standard Operating Procedure", and "Quality Control
Metric" concepts from which it is
composed.](concept_f2 "fig:"){#fig:concept width="80%"}

Sample collection and initial processing
----------------------------------------

-   **Location:** .

-   **Details:** Sample collection encompasses various biological
    materials including DNA, RNA, serum, and other tissue types. These
    are initially processed by the Swiss Multi-Omics Center (SMOC),
    which is responsible for the physical handling and preliminary omics
    data generation.

Data transfer and bioinformatics analysis
-----------------------------------------

-   **Transfer:** The raw multi-omic data generated by SMOC is
    transferred to BioMedIT using secure protocols such as sFTP.

-   **Bioinformatics processing:** At BioMedIT, advanced bioinformatics
    pipelines are employed to analyse the data. This includes
    comprehensive analyses across metabolomics, proteomics, and genomics
    disciplines.

-   **Outputs:** The main outputs from these analyses include:

    -   A large dataset stored for long-term reuse and research
        purposes.

    -   Standard reports generated in formats such as TSV, PDF, and
        HTML.

    -   Result data formatted in RDF, SQL, TSV, which are then adapted
        to meet the SPHN connector's requirements for merging into
        clinical data warehouses.

Data conversion and integration
-------------------------------

-   **Conversion:** Key actionable results are extracted from the large
    dataset and prepared according to our reporting evidence guidelines
    and formatted using the SPHN ontology. This preparation uses
    specific OMICS concepts such as "omic result" to ensure that the
    data can be seamlessly integrated and interpreted within the
    clinical framework.

-   **Integration:** The processed results are converted to fit the
    database requirements of the hospital's clinical data warehouse.

Presentation of final results
-----------------------------

-   **Internal Network Transfer:** Outputs, including the standard
    reports and result data, are transferred back to the network. This
    step is crucial as clinicians do not have direct access to secured
    BioMedIT servers.

-   **Access and Presentation:** Final analysis results are made
    accessible to clinicians through an internal webpage and
    downloadable TSV, PDF, or other formats. This ensures that the
    results are readily available for clinical decision-making and
    further research. The clinical data warehouse will maintain the main
    omic result data in RDF, SQL, or other suitable formats that best
    match the current system.

By aligning with the SPHN RDF ontology and implementing it through newly
developed OMICS concepts, this data flow ensures that genomic and other
omic data types are integrated into the hospital's clinical operations,
enhancing the capacity for precision medicine and personalised patient
care. The entire process is illustrated in **figure
[1](#fig:precision_med_dataflow){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:precision_med_dataflow"}**, providing a visual
representation of the data flow from sample collection to final result
presentation within the hospital's infrastructure.
