---
layout: default
title: executive_summary
nav_order: 5
---

Last update: 20240919

Executive summary
=================

The precision medicine unit at is proposed to represent the forefront of
medical science, using an integrated multi-omics approach to augment
paediatric healthcare. This strategy extends beyond genomic data to
incorporate a wide array of omics technologies, such as genomics,
proteomics, metabolomics, and innovative methods like single-cell
sequencing. Together, these technologies can provide a comprehensive
understanding of disease mechanisms, which is instrumental in devising
personalised treatment strategies for rare and complex paediatric
conditions.

Comparable benchmarks have demonstrated clear cost-saving potential
through precise diagnostics and targeted therapy. For rare diseases,
approximately 40% of probands received a genetic diagnosis
[@wright2023genomic; @wojcik2024genome] and altered critical care
management in 77% of diagnosed cases [@lunke2023integrated]. A
well-managed work-flow can result in rapid whole-genome sequencing with
a turnaround of 37 hours on average [@abou2023rapid]. A forecast,
projected into 2030, for the yearly cases of sepsis are shown in
**figure
[1](#fig:p_cases_sepsis_kispi_yearly_forecast_exec){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:p_cases_sepsis_kispi_yearly_forecast_exec"}**. Black and
red values show the expected number of deaths with and without precise
diagnostics and targeted therapy, respectively.

Establishing these benchmarks as our initial goals is not only
technically feasible but also a significant achievement in its own
right, setting a foundation for potential further advancements as our
understanding and capabilities evolve.

![Year deaths due to sepsis at . This data is based on statistics
reported by Bundesamt fuÌˆr Gesundheit (BAG), <https://www.bag.admin.ch/>
for years 2010-2022. Time series was performed using Poisson regression
to extrapulate the expected outcomes from 2010-2030. Predictions for the
cost and number of cases were generated in section
[\[sec:benefit\_analysis\]](#sec:benefit_analysis){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:benefit_analysis"}. DP: Diagnostic procedure. HD: Primary
diagnosis. ND: Secondary diagnosis.
](../stats/foph_key_stats/output/p_cases_sepsis_kispi_yearly_forecast){#fig:p_cases_sepsis_kispi_yearly_forecast_exec
width="100%"}
