---
layout: default
title: introduction
nav_order: 5
---

Last update: 20240919

Introduction {#intro}
============

![precision medicine unit overview. The unit needs illustrate the
management philosophy for minimal disruption for technical progress. The
unit overview illustrates the main flow of information to key products.
Key unit products illustrate the flow of information, with technical
hurdles avoided using the principles of single-source management and
shared open
development.](precision_med_unit_management "fig:"){#fig:overview
width="48%"} ![precision medicine unit overview. The unit needs
illustrate the management philosophy for minimal disruption for
technical progress. The unit overview illustrates the main flow of
information to key products. Key unit products illustrate the flow of
information, with technical hurdles avoided using the principles of
single-source management and shared open
development.](precision_med_overview "fig:"){#fig:overview width="48%"}

The precision medicine unit is ready to update our paediatric healthcare
by serving an array of advanced capabilities in multi-omics, pioneering
research methodologies, purpose-built infrastructure, and rigorous data
analysis techniques. Our approach sets a new benchmark for personalised
treatment, employing cutting-edge omics services to provide tailored
healthcare for the clinic and enrich basic science at . An overview of
our unit is shown in **figure [2](#fig:overview){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:overview"}**.

Traditionally, medical practices have predominantly adhered to a
standard approach, tailoring disease prevention and treatment strategies
based on the average response anticipated from a general population.
This conventional method has proven effective for certain patients and
conditions, but often falls short when individual variances in genetics,
environment, and lifestyle are significant factors influencing health
outcomes. Precision medicine emerges as a revolutionary paradigm,
diverging from the one-size-fits-all approach to embrace these
individual differences. This innovative medical strategy integrates
detailed layers of genomic, environmental, and lifestyle data to tailor
personalized healthcare solutions. The evolution of precision medicine
has been markedly propelled by significant advances in biomedical
research, affecting millions worldwide. It aims not only to refine
disease treatment and prevention but also promises enhanced outcomes by
aligning more closely with each person's unique biological makeup. This
approach has profound implications across various domains of healthcare,
including oncology, pharmacogenomics, and the management of rare
diseases, setting a new standard in personalized healthcare. Our
partners are implementing precision medicine approaches at the [Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)](https://www.precisionmed.ch/en/),
[The LOOP Zurich](https://theloopzurich.ch/en/),
[CHUV](https://www.chuv.ch/en/bdsc/research/our-groups/precision-medicine),
and all private industry leaders such as
[Roche](https://www.roche.com/about/strategy/personalised-healthcare),
[Genentech](https://www.gene.com/topics/personalized-healthcare), and
[Pfizer](https://www.pfizer.com/science/innovation/precision-medicine).

There have also been many failed promises where precision medicine did
not deliver. However, these failures are typically due to the logistical
difficulties of creating an efficient system. This is not due to
inherent problems with the technology. Success has been demonstrated by
a number of examples in the UK, US, and UAE, which resulted from careful
planning and development.

The precision medicine unit at can be ready to collaborate closely with
the Health 2030 Genome Center, part of the Swiss Multi-Omics Center
(SMOC) (<http://smoc.ethz.ch>), to harness state-of-the-art genomic
services. This partnership underpins our cutting-edge approach in
pediatric healthcare, enabling us to deliver personalised treatment
strategies through comprehensive multi-omic data analysis. As a
collaborative effort among major Swiss universities and university
hospitals, including UNIBE, Inselspital, UNIL, CHUV, UNIGE, HUG, and
EPFL, the center exemplifies a comprehensive approach to personalized
health care and genomic research. SMOC integrates expertise across
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. This integrated
multi-omic analysis is essential for the thorough exploration and
understanding of clinical specimens. Accredited under ISO 15189, the
center ensures the highest standards in sequencing and data analysis,
leveraging state-of-the-art technologies such as the Illumina
Novaseq6000 platforms and TruSeq DNA PCR-Free library preparation.

We will employ essential services such as:

-   Clinical-grade whole genome sequencing (WGS)

-   Clinical-grade whole exome sequencing (WES)

-   Clinical-grade RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)

-   Fast turnaround time for clinical-grade WGS, WES, and RNA-seq

-   Low-coverage WGS with variant imputation

-   Viral pathogen WGS

-   Microbiome WGS

Our subsequent analysis occurs at the cutting edge of technology,
employing the most reliable reference genomes based on GRCh38 and
adhering to stringent guidelines for handling sensitive clinical data,
as outlined by the SPHN/BioMedIT network on the sciCORE platform
(<https://sphn.ch/network/projects/biomedit/>). This framework supports
the SwissPedHealth initiatives, enhancing the capacity for robust
clinical diagnosis and research. We are also thus preparing to meet the
rapidly approaching national expectations. These expectations are
demonstrated by projects like the Swiss Federated Genomics Network
(SFGN) and Genome of Switzerland (GoS) which aim to sequence
clinical-grade genomes on a national scale, contributing to European
genomic initiatives and supporting the advancement of genomic medicine
across the region.

By capitalising on these integrated expert services we can provide
analysis within the precision medicine unit:

-   Sequencing data processing

-   Genome variant calling

-   Variant clinical annotation and prioritising

-   RNA expression profiling

-   Single cell RNA-seq

-   Multi-omic joint analysis of DNA, RNA, proteomics

The precision medicine unit will therefore be able to provide
clinical-grade results with fast turnaround time - from DNA to variant
interpretation and functional effect. Material will be shipped from to
SMOC where high-throughput OMICs performed. OMIC analysis will then be
performed on our secure high-performance computer infrastructure.
Clinical reports containing actionable results can be provided to the
clinic. Rich datasets will be generated for research and discovery.
